hugo/content/post/life.md, before:

---
title: "Life of an audio signal"
date: "2016-03-27T20:54:18+01:00"
description: "Analog / Digital / Acoustic"
draft: true
---

In the [previous post](<{{% ref "anatomy.md" %}}>), I described what an audio signal is. Now, let’s discuss how this signal is concretely represented as it passes through each stage of a typical home audio playback system.

For the sake of this discussion, I am going to assume the most common and straightforward use case: playing a *digital stream* over loudspeakers (or headphones). By “digital stream” I mean any audio signal that is processed by a computer or computer-like system; that can be anything including a MP3 file, online video, online music streaming, the soundtrack of a Blu-ray disc, etc. This does not include analogue media such as vinyl discs or cassette tapes.

Before this digital content can reach your eardrums, it has to go through a series of steps. Between these steps, the audio signal is materialized in different ways depending on which part of the audio “pipeline” we are looking at. In this post I will refer to these concrete representations as *realms* {{% footnote note %}}Note that “realm” is not a widely used term — the term “domain” is normally used. However, I felt that this could create confusion with *time domain* and *frequency domain*, which are completely unrelated concepts.{{% /footnote %}}. I am going to start at the source and then make my way through to the listener.

To keep things clear and simple, the example signal I’ll use throughout this post is a monophonic (one channel) 1 kHz sine wave. For all intents of purposes, each additional channel can be assumed to act like a completely separate audio signal that takes a similar path through the system.

{{% figure "/diagrams/realms.svg" %}}

# The digital realm

It all starts within the digital device, which can be any computer or computer-like gadget (PC, smartphone, Bluetooth receiver, etc.). Most devices read or receive audio data in *digitally compressed* form. Popular digital compression algorithms include [MP3][], [AAC][] and [FLAC][].

[Digital compression][] {{% footnote note %}}Not to be confused with *[dynamic range compression](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dynamic_range_compression)*, which is completely unrelated.{{% /footnote %}} is a complicated subject, which I won’t dig into further in this post. In any case, the data first goes through a *decoder* which converts the compressed signal into uncompressed form, which looks like this:

{{% figure "/plots/1khz-sine-wave-digital.svg" %}}

The plot above shows that, in the digital realm, audio is not represented by a continous, smoothly changing signal — instead, all we have are regularly-spaced “snapshots” that indicate what the signal amplitude is at some point in time. This is called a *[discrete signal][]*, and the “snapshots” are called *samples*. In this example, we have 44100 samples every second, or more formally, the *sample rate* is 44.1 kHz. Such a sample rate is standard for music — other types of content, such as movies or games, use a slightly higher rate, 48 kHz, for mostly historical reasons.

Because memory is not infinite, each sample value has a finite precision. In practice, each sample is typically converted to a signed integer with a precision, or *[bit depth][]*, of 16 bits. This process is called *[quantization][]*. A 16-bit signed integer can take a value from -32768 to +32767. Samples outside of this range cannot be represented, and will be clamped to the nearest possible value; this is called *digital [clipping][]*, and is best avoided as it sounds quite bad. A signal that peaks at the highest possible amplitude without clipping is called a *full-range* or *full-scale* signal{{% footnote ref %}}[IEC 61606–1:2009](https://webstore.iec.ch/publication/5664), *Digital audio parts — Basic measurement methods of audio characteristics — General*, §3.1.10{{% /footnote %}}.

Finally, the signal is physically represented simply by transmitting the value of each point, or *sample*, one after the other. For example, the above signal is transmitted as 4653, 9211, 13583, etc. in the form of binary numbers. This way of transmitting the signal is called *[pulse-code modulation][]*.

This section just skirted the surface of how digital audio works. The details of how sampled signals behave in practice can be quite involved and are often counter-intuitive; as a result, misrepresentation of digital audio phenomena is quite commonplace in the audiophile community, leading to confusion and misguided advice. Digital audio expert [Chris Montgomery][] produced a [series of videos][xiphvideo] that explains these complex phenomena with very clear and straightforward examples — it is a must-watch if you wish to learn more about the digital realm.

# The analog realm

Loudspeakers and headphones cannot receive a digital signal; it has to be converted to an *analog* signal first. This conversion is done in an electronic circuit appropriately named the *[digital-to-analog converter][]*, or DAC. This is where computer engineering ends and electrical engineering begins. The main task of the DAC is to take each sample value and convert it to some electrical *[voltage][]* on its output pins. The resulting signal looks like the following:

{{% figure "/plots/1khz-sine-wave-analog.svg" %}}

It is important to realize that in the plot above, the unit used for the vertical scale is the *[volt][]*. In other words, the audio signal in the analog domain is defined by its *voltage*. It is *not* defined by [current][] nor [power][]. Even when the signal is used as the input of a loudspeaker, it is still voltage that determines the sound that comes out; power dissipation is a *consequence*, not a *cause*, of the audio signal flowing through the loudspeaker. As Pat Brown [elegantly puts it][patbrown]: "power is *drawn*, not applied". Another way to state this is to say that properly engineered analog audio devices act as *[voltage sources][]*, which are connected to each other by way of *[impedance bridging][]*. This is a frequent source of confusion.

The DAC took our discrete signal and converted it into a continuous electrical signal. The central (mean) value of the signal, defined as the *[DC offset][]*, is zero volts; the signal swings around that central value, *[alternating][]* between positive and negative voltage. In this example, our full-scale digital stream was converted to an analog signal that swings between -1.41 V and +1.41 V. Depending on the specific model of DAC used, its volume control setting (if any) and the signals involved, these numbers can vary — typical peak amplitude can go as low as 0.5 V {{% footnote ref %}}Wikipedia, *[Nominal levels](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Line_level#Nominal_levels)*, peak amplitude for consumer audio{{% /footnote %}} or as high as 2.8 V {{% footnote ref %}}[IEC 61938:2013](https://webstore.iec.ch/publication/6142), *Guide to the recommended characteristics of analogue interfaces to achieve interoperability*, §8.2.1{{% /footnote %}} depending on the situation. Low voltage signals are easier (cheaper) to implement, but are more susceptible to noise and interference.

The amount of *current* or *power* transferred from the source of an analog signal to the equipment plugged in at the other end of the cable (the *[load][]*) is determined by the *[impedance][]* of the load, also known as the *[input impedance][]*. According to [Ohm’s law][], the lower the impedance, the more current, and therefore power, will be required to sustain a given voltage. {{% footnote note %}}Note that, in the case of loudspeakers, power is not a good indication of loudness, because some of that power is dissipated in the form of heat, not sound. A more *[efficient](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrical_efficiency)* loudspeaker will produce louder sound from the same amount of power compared to a less efficient loudspeaker, even if their impedances are the same.{{% /footnote %}}

DACs, as well as most other types of analog audio equipment (such as filters or mixers), are not designed to provide significant amounts of power. Instead, they are meant to be connected to a high-impedance load, typically 20 kΩ or higher {{% footnote ref %}}[IEC 61938:2013](https://webstore.iec.ch/publication/6142), *Guide to the recommended characteristics of analogue interfaces to achieve interoperability*, §8.2.1{{% /footnote %}}. This means that the load is acting much like a [voltmeter][] or oscilloscope — it is “peeking” at the input voltage without drawing significant power from it. Such a signal that carries some voltage but very little power is called a *[line-level][]* signal.

On the other hand, loudspeakers (and headphones to a lesser extent) are low-impedance devices (typically between 4 Ω and 8 Ω in the case of speakers). This means they require a lot of power to operate, even though their input voltage is not necessarily much higher than the signal shown above. For example, most speakers will happily produce comfortably loud sound with as little as 5 V, but might consume as much as 6 [watts][] while doing so {{% footnote note %}}From the numbers given a keen eye will [deduce](http://www.sengpielaudio.com/calculator-ohm.htm) that this example speaker has an impedance of 4 Ω. One thing to note is that loudspeaker impedance is highly dependent on the frequency of the signal, making the use of one number an oversimplification. The impedance that manufacturers advertise, called the *rated impedance*, is 1.25 times the *minimum* impedance of the speaker across its rated frequency range. (see [IEC 60268–5:2003](https://webstore.iec.ch/publication/1223), *Loudspeakers*, §16.1){{% /footnote %}}, an amount of power that typical line-level equipment is not able to provide.

This problem is solved by using a *[power amplifier][]*. This is a component that conveniently provides a high-impedance input for connecting line-level equipment, while exposing an output that is capable of providing large amounts of power, typically 10 W or more, to a low-impedance load connected to its output. {{% footnote note %}}In practice, most amplifiers are also capable of increasing the voltage (amplitude) of the signal; this is called the [gain](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gain_%28electronics%29) of the amplifier. This is because most loudspeakers require voltages that are somewhat higher than line level in order to play loud enough. Still, the primary goal of a power amplifier is to provide power, not to increase voltage.{{% /footnote %}} In an audio system, such a load is typically a loudspeaker or headphone. Signals carrying a significant amount of power are referred to as *speaker-level signals*.

In some home audio systems, the DAC and the amplifier are integrated into one single device, which is called an *integrated amplifier* or more commonly an *[AV receiver][]* (AVR).

# The acoustic realm

Finally, in order to reach your ears, the analog signal must be converted to an *acoustic* signal, that is, actual [sound waves][]. This is accomplished using a device called an *electroacoustic [transducer][]*, or *driver*. The output of a driver when excited with our example signal, as measured at a distance of one meter in front of it, assuming no interference from the environment (*free space* or *anechoic* conditions), might look like the following:

{{% figure "/plots/1khz-sine-wave-acoustic.svg" %}}

Note the change of vertical scale. We’re not dealing with voltage anymore — we’re dealing with *[sound pressure][]* instead. Indeed, sound is a physical phenomenon in which transient changes in pressure (*compression*, *rarefaction*) produced by the vibration of a *sound source* propagate through the space around it. In other words, it is a *[longitudinal wave][]*. Sound pressure, expressed in *[Pascals][]* (Pa), quantifies the difference between normal atmospheric pressure and some local, dynamic change in pressure, at a given point in time and space. The human ear is equipped to detect these changes, which are then — finally! — perceived as sound by the human brain.

It is difficult to design a driver that is capable of accurately handling the entire range of audible frequencies. Consequently, multiple transducer types are available:

-   *[Subwoofers][]* are drivers that handle very low frequencies from 20 Hz to 100 Hz.
-   *[Woofers][]* handle low frequencies from 60 Hz to 250 Hz.
-   *[Midranges][]* handle frequencies from 250 Hz to 2 kHz.
-   *[Tweeters][]* handle high frequencies from 2 kHz to 20 kHz.

Note that these boundaries are not set in stone — for example, drivers that act both as woofers and midranges are very commonplace in modern systems.

In order to reproduce the entire range of human hearing, several of these drivers are assembled inside a single “box”, called the *enclosure*. The drivers are typically mounted flush with one side of the box, which is called the *front baffle*. The resulting device is called a *[loudspeaker][]*. A typical speaker contains two or three drivers; these are called *two-way* and *three-way* systems, respectively. To prevent unwanted distortion, before the analog signal reaches the drivers, an electrical circuit inside the speaker ensures that each driver only receives the part of the audio spectrum that it is designed to handle; this circuit is called a *[crossover][]*.

In modern audio systems, the subwoofer is often a separate speaker, for a number of reasons that I will not dig into here. {{% footnote note %}}Note that the “.1” channel of 5.1 or 7.1 systems, also called the *[LFE](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Low-frequency_effects) channel*, is not quite the same thing as the subwoofer channel. The subwoofer typically receives audio signals both from the LFE channel and the other channels.{{% /footnote %}} In this case, the crossover that handles the subwoofer frequencies is found upstream of the loudspeaker — typically, it sits inside the AV receiver.

What I’ve described here is called a *passive* speaker, which is the most common type in consumer “Hi-Fi” systems. Sometimes the amplifier and speaker are integrated into the same device; this is called an *active* or *[powered][]* speaker. Examples include professional “studio monitor” speakers, which have line-level inputs. Other products, such as “Bluetooth speakers”, go one step further and throw in a DAC as well for a completely integrated solution.

Speakers are mechanical and acoustic devices. As such, they are often bulkier, more complicated to design, and more expensive to produce compared to purely electronic devices that only deal with digital or analog audio signals. DACs and amplifiers are widely considered to be “solved problems” in audio engineering; in contrast, building a good loudspeaker is *hard*. On most performance metrics, even good speakers typically degrade the audio signal by one order of magnitude or more compared to most electronic devices.

Another source of complication is that speakers radiate sound in multiple directions, exhibiting *radiation patterns* that vary with frequency. This in turn means that they interact with their environment (the listening room) in ways that are difficult to predict but nonetheless have an enormous impact on how the radiated sound will be perceived by a human listener. This makes choosing and configuring a speaker system quite the challenge. Hopefully, future posts on this blog will be able to help.

{{% footnotes %}}

[aac]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Audio_Coding

[alternating]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alternating_current

[av receiver]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AV_receiver

[bit depth]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Audio_bit_depth

[crossover]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Audio_crossover

[current]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_current

[flac]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FLAC

[mp3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MP3

[chris montgomery]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chris_Montgomery

[clipping]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clipping_%28signal_processing%29

[dc offset]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DC_bias

[digital-to-analog converter]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital-to-analog_converter

[digital compression]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_compression

[discrete signal]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discrete-time_signal

[impedance]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrical_impedance

[impedance bridging]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impedance_bridging

[input impedance]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Input_impedance

[line-level]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Line_level

[load]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrical_load

[longitudinal wave]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Longitudinal_wave

[loudspeaker]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loudspeaker

[midranges]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mid-range_speaker

[ohm’s law]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ohm's_law

[pascals]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pascal_%28unit%29

[patbrown]: http://www.prosoundtraining.com/site/author/pat-brown/meaningful-metrics-the-use-and-abuse-of-loudspeaker-power-ratings/

[power]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_power

[powered]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Powered_speakers

[power amplifier]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Audio_power_amplifier

[pulse-code modulation]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pulse-code_modulation

[quantization]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantization_%28signal_processing%29

[sound pressure]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sound_pressure

[sound waves]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sound

[subwoofers]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subwoofer

[transducer]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transducer

[tweeters]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tweeter

[volt]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Volt

[voltmeter]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voltmeter

[voltage]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voltage

[voltage sources]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voltage_source

[watts]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Watt

[woofers]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Woofer

[xiphvideo]: https://xiph.org/video/

Commit message:

Mention that digital value, voltage and sound pressure are proportional.

hugo/content/post/life.md, after:

---
title: "Life of an audio signal"
date: "2016-03-27T20:54:18+01:00"
description: "Analog / Digital / Acoustic"
draft: true
---

In the [previous post](<{{% ref "anatomy.md" %}}>), I described what an audio signal is. Now, let’s discuss how this signal is concretely represented as it passes through each stage of a typical home audio playback system.

For the sake of this discussion, I am going to assume the most common and straightforward use case: playing a *digital stream* over loudspeakers (or headphones). By “digital stream” I mean any audio signal that is processed by a computer or computer-like system; that can be anything including a MP3 file, online video, online music streaming, the soundtrack of a Blu-ray disc, etc. This does not include analogue media such as vinyl discs or cassette tapes.

Before this digital content can reach your eardrums, it has to go through a series of steps. Between these steps, the audio signal is materialized in different ways depending on which part of the audio “pipeline” we are looking at. In this post I will refer to these concrete representations as *realms* {{% footnote note %}}Note that “realm” is not a widely used term — the term “domain” is normally used. However, I felt that this could create confusion with *time domain* and *frequency domain*, which are completely unrelated concepts.{{% /footnote %}}. I am going to start at the source and then make my way through to the listener.

To keep things clear and simple, the example signal I’ll use throughout this post is a monophonic (one channel) 1 kHz sine wave. For all intents of purposes, each additional channel can be assumed to act like a completely separate audio signal that takes a similar path through the system.

{{% figure "/diagrams/realms.svg" %}}

# The digital realm

It all starts within the digital device, which can be any computer or computer-like gadget (PC, smartphone, Bluetooth receiver, etc.). Most devices read or receive audio data in *digitally compressed* form. Popular digital compression algorithms include [MP3][], [AAC][] and [FLAC][].

[Digital compression][] {{% footnote note %}}Not to be confused with *[dynamic range compression](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dynamic_range_compression)*, which is completely unrelated.{{% /footnote %}} is a complicated subject, which I won’t dig into further in this post. In any case, the data first goes through a *decoder* which converts the compressed signal into uncompressed form, which looks like this:

{{% figure "/plots/1khz-sine-wave-digital.svg" %}}

The plot above shows that, in the digital realm, audio is not represented by a continous, smoothly changing signal — instead, all we have are regularly-spaced “snapshots” that indicate what the signal amplitude is at some point in time. This is called a *[discrete signal][]*, and the “snapshots” are called *samples*. In this example, we have 44100 samples every second, or more formally, the *sample rate* is 44.1 kHz. Such a sample rate is standard for music — other types of content, such as movies or games, use a slightly higher rate, 48 kHz, for mostly historical reasons.

Because memory is not infinite, each sample value has a finite precision. In practice, each sample is typically converted to a signed integer with a precision, or *[bit depth][]*, of 16 bits. This process is called *[quantization][]*. A 16-bit signed integer can take a value from -32768 to +32767. Samples outside of this range cannot be represented, and will be clamped to the nearest possible value; this is called *digital [clipping][]*, and is best avoided as it sounds quite bad. A signal that peaks at the highest possible amplitude without clipping is called a *full-range* or *full-scale* signal{{% footnote ref %}}[IEC 61606–1:2009](https://webstore.iec.ch/publication/5664), *Digital audio parts — Basic measurement methods of audio characteristics — General*, §3.1.10{{% /footnote %}}.

Finally, the signal is physically represented simply by transmitting the value of each point, or *sample*, one after the other. For example, the above signal is transmitted as 4653, 9211, 13583, etc. in the form of binary numbers. This way of transmitting the signal is called *[pulse-code modulation][]*.

This section just skirted the surface of how digital audio works. The details of how sampled signals behave in practice can be quite involved and are often counter-intuitive; as a result, misrepresentation of digital audio phenomena is quite commonplace in the audiophile community, leading to confusion and misguided advice. Digital audio expert [Chris Montgomery][] produced a [series of videos][xiphvideo] that explains these complex phenomena with very clear and straightforward examples — it is a must-watch if you wish to learn more about the digital realm.

# The analog realm

Loudspeakers and headphones cannot receive a digital signal; it has to be converted to an *analog* signal first. This conversion is done in an electronic circuit appropriately named the *[digital-to-analog converter][]*, or DAC. This is where computer engineering ends and electrical engineering begins. The main task of the DAC is to take each sample value and convert it to some electrical *[voltage][]* on its output pins. The resulting signal looks like the following:

{{% figure "/plots/1khz-sine-wave-analog.svg" %}}

It is important to realize that in the plot above, the unit used for the vertical scale is the *[volt][]*. In other words, the audio signal in the analog domain is defined by its *voltage*. It is *not* defined by [current][] nor [power][]. Even when the signal is used as the input of a loudspeaker, it is still voltage that determines the sound that comes out; power dissipation is a *consequence*, not a *cause*, of the audio signal flowing through the loudspeaker. As Pat Brown [elegantly puts it][patbrown]: "power is *drawn*, not applied". Another way to state this is to say that properly engineered analog audio devices act as *[voltage sources][]*, which are connected to each other by way of *[impedance bridging][]*. This is a frequent source of confusion.

The DAC took our discrete signal and converted it into a continuous electrical signal, whose voltage is (hopefully) *proportional* to the digital sample value. The central (mean) value of the signal, defined as the *[DC offset][]*, is zero volts; the signal swings around that central value, *[alternating][]* between positive and negative voltage. In this example, our full-scale digital stream was converted to an analog signal that swings between -1.41 V and +1.41 V. Depending on the specific model of DAC used, its volume control setting (if any) and the signals involved, these numbers can vary — typical peak amplitude can go as low as 0.5 V {{% footnote ref %}}Wikipedia, *[Nominal levels](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Line_level#Nominal_levels)*, peak amplitude for consumer audio{{% /footnote %}} or as high as 2.8 V {{% footnote ref %}}[IEC 61938:2013](https://webstore.iec.ch/publication/6142), *Guide to the recommended characteristics of analogue interfaces to achieve interoperability*, §8.2.1{{% /footnote %}} depending on the situation. Low voltage signals are easier (cheaper) to implement, but are more susceptible to noise and interference.

The amount of *current* or *power* transferred from the source of an analog signal to the equipment plugged in at the other end of the cable (the *[load][]*) is determined by the *[impedance][]* of the load, also known as the *[input impedance][]*. According to [Ohm’s law][], the lower the impedance, the more current, and therefore power, will be required to sustain a given voltage. {{% footnote note %}}Note that, in the case of loudspeakers, power is not a good indication of loudness, because some of that power is dissipated in the form of heat, not sound. A more *[efficient](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrical_efficiency)* loudspeaker will produce louder sound from the same amount of power compared to a less efficient loudspeaker, even if their impedances are the same.{{% /footnote %}}

DACs, as well as most other types of analog audio equipment (such as filters or mixers), are not designed to provide significant amounts of power. Instead, they are meant to be connected to a high-impedance load, typically 20 kΩ or higher {{% footnote ref %}}[IEC 61938:2013](https://webstore.iec.ch/publication/6142), *Guide to the recommended characteristics of analogue interfaces to achieve interoperability*, §8.2.1{{% /footnote %}}. This means that the load is acting much like a [voltmeter][] or oscilloscope — it is “peeking” at the input voltage without drawing significant power from it. Such a signal that carries some voltage but very little power is called a *[line-level][]* signal.

On the other hand, loudspeakers (and headphones to a lesser extent) are low-impedance devices (typically between 4 Ω and 8 Ω in the case of speakers). This means they require a lot of power to operate, even though their input voltage is not necessarily much higher than the signal shown above. For example, most speakers will happily produce comfortably loud sound with as little as 5 V, but might consume as much as 6 [watts][] while doing so {{% footnote note %}}From the numbers given a keen eye will [deduce](http://www.sengpielaudio.com/calculator-ohm.htm) that this example speaker has an impedance of 4 Ω. One thing to note is that loudspeaker impedance is highly dependent on the frequency of the signal, making the use of one number an oversimplification. The impedance that manufacturers advertise, called the *rated impedance*, is 1.25 times the *minimum* impedance of the speaker across its rated frequency range. (see [IEC 60268–5:2003](https://webstore.iec.ch/publication/1223), *Loudspeakers*, §16.1){{% /footnote %}}, an amount of power that typical line-level equipment is not able to provide.

This problem is solved by using a *[power amplifier][]*. This is a component that conveniently provides a high-impedance input for connecting line-level equipment, while exposing an output that is capable of providing large amounts of power, typically 10 W or more, to a low-impedance load connected to its output. {{% footnote note %}}In practice, most amplifiers are also capable of increasing the voltage (amplitude) of the signal; this is called the [gain](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gain_%28electronics%29) of the amplifier. This is because most loudspeakers require voltages that are somewhat higher than line level in order to play loud enough. Still, the primary goal of a power amplifier is to provide power, not to increase voltage.{{% /footnote %}} In an audio system, such a load is typically a loudspeaker or headphone. Signals carrying a significant amount of power are referred to as *speaker-level signals*.

In some home audio systems, the DAC and the amplifier are integrated into one single device, which is called an *integrated amplifier* or more commonly an *[AV receiver][]* (AVR).

# The acoustic realm

Finally, in order to reach your ears, the analog signal must be converted to an *acoustic* signal, that is, actual [sound waves][]. This is accomplished using a device called an *electroacoustic [transducer][]*, or *driver*. The output of a driver when excited with our example signal, as measured at a distance of one meter in front of it, assuming no interference from the environment (*free space* or *anechoic* conditions), might look like the following:

{{% figure "/plots/1khz-sine-wave-acoustic.svg" %}}

Note the change of vertical scale. We’re not dealing with voltage anymore — we’re dealing with *[sound pressure][]* instead. Indeed, sound is a physical phenomenon in which transient changes in pressure (*compression*, *rarefaction*) produced by the vibration of a *sound source* propagate through the space around it. In other words, it is a *[longitudinal wave][]*. Sound pressure, expressed in *[Pascals][]* (Pa), quantifies the difference between normal atmospheric pressure and some local, dynamic change in pressure, at a given point in time and space. The human ear is equipped to detect these changes, which are then — finally! — perceived as sound by the human brain.

An ideal transducer will produce sound pressure *proportional* to the voltage applied to it, like in the above waveform. However, it is difficult to design a driver that is capable of doing that across the entire range of audible frequencies. Consequently, multiple transducer types are available:

-   *[Subwoofers][]* are drivers that handle very low frequencies from 20 Hz to 100 Hz.
-   *[Woofers][]* handle low frequencies from 60 Hz to 250 Hz.
-   *[Midranges][]* handle frequencies from 250 Hz to 2 kHz.
-   *[Tweeters][]* handle high frequencies from 2 kHz to 20 kHz.

Note that these boundaries are not set in stone — for example, drivers that act both as woofers and midranges are very commonplace in modern systems.

In order to reproduce the entire range of human hearing, several of these drivers are assembled inside a single “box”, called the *enclosure*. The drivers are typically mounted flush with one side of the box, which is called the *front baffle*. The resulting device is called a *[loudspeaker][]*. A typical speaker contains two or three drivers; these are called *two-way* and *three-way* systems, respectively. To prevent unwanted distortion, before the analog signal reaches the drivers, an electrical circuit inside the speaker ensures that each driver only receives the part of the audio spectrum that it is designed to handle; this circuit is called a *[crossover][]*.

In modern audio systems, the subwoofer is often a separate speaker, for a number of reasons that I will not dig into here. {{% footnote note %}}Note that the “.1” channel of 5.1 or 7.1 systems, also called the *[LFE](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Low-frequency_effects) channel*, is not quite the same thing as the subwoofer channel. The subwoofer typically receives audio signals both from the LFE channel and the other channels.{{% /footnote %}} In this case, the crossover that handles the subwoofer frequencies is found upstream of the loudspeaker — typically, it sits inside the AV receiver.

What I’ve described here is called a *passive* speaker, which is the most common type in consumer “Hi-Fi” systems. Sometimes the amplifier and speaker are integrated into the same device; this is called an *active* or *[powered][]* speaker. Examples include professional “studio monitor” speakers, which have line-level inputs. Other products, such as “Bluetooth speakers”, go one step further and throw in a DAC as well for a completely integrated solution.

Speakers are mechanical and acoustic devices. As such, they are often bulkier, more complicated to design, and more expensive to produce compared to purely electronic devices that only deal with digital or analog audio signals. DACs and amplifiers are widely considered to be “solved problems” in audio engineering; in contrast, building a good loudspeaker is *hard*. On most performance metrics, even good speakers typically degrade the audio signal by one order of magnitude or more compared to most electronic devices.

Another source of complication is that speakers radiate sound in multiple directions, exhibiting *radiation patterns* that vary with frequency. This in turn means that they interact with their environment (the listening room) in ways that are difficult to predict but nonetheless have an enormous impact on how the radiated sound will be perceived by a human listener. This makes choosing and configuring a speaker system quite the challenge. Hopefully, future posts on this blog will be able to help.

{{% footnotes %}}

[aac]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Audio_Coding

[alternating]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alternating_current

[av receiver]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AV_receiver

[bit depth]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Audio_bit_depth

[crossover]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Audio_crossover

[current]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_current

[flac]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FLAC

[mp3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MP3

[chris montgomery]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chris_Montgomery

[clipping]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clipping_%28signal_processing%29

[dc offset]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DC_bias

[digital-to-analog converter]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital-to-analog_converter

[digital compression]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_compression

[discrete signal]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discrete-time_signal

[impedance]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrical_impedance

[impedance bridging]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impedance_bridging

[input impedance]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Input_impedance

[line-level]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Line_level

[load]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electrical_load

[longitudinal wave]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Longitudinal_wave

[loudspeaker]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loudspeaker

[midranges]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mid-range_speaker

[ohm’s law]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ohm's_law

[pascals]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pascal_%28unit%29

[patbrown]: http://www.prosoundtraining.com/site/author/pat-brown/meaningful-metrics-the-use-and-abuse-of-loudspeaker-power-ratings/

[power]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_power

[powered]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Powered_speakers

[power amplifier]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Audio_power_amplifier

[pulse-code modulation]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pulse-code_modulation

[quantization]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantization_%28signal_processing%29

[sound pressure]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sound_pressure

[sound waves]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sound

[subwoofers]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subwoofer

[transducer]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transducer

[tweeters]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tweeter

[volt]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Volt

[voltmeter]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voltmeter

[voltage]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voltage

[voltage sources]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voltage_source

[watts]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Watt

[woofers]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Woofer

[xiphvideo]: https://xiph.org/video/
